---
layout: post
title: Large defects in silicon
year: 2013
month: 04
day: 26
summary: Analysing large defect structures in silicon from TEM and forcefield-based MD
category: techniques
tags: Comparison experiment MD
published: true
---
Atomistic simulations should always be compared to experimental results (a theme
which is developed in Chapter 18, Comparison to Experiment). These comparisons
allow us to test the reliability of the simulations, and to learn more about the
experiments: ultimately, we should have enough confidence in the simulations to
interpret and explain experimental results.

A recent paper in Phys. Rev. Lett.[[1]](#R1) takes this approach for a large
defect in bulk silicon induced by ion implantation. (Ion implantation is one
standard route to dope silicon and germanium for electronic devices, and is
normally followed by annealing.) Most importantly, the experimental technique
used, high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy
(HAADF STEM), was compared to modelling without any processing or structure
fitting. Normally, high resolution TEM requires some image processing.

In the modelling, the defect was induced by creating a series of silicon
interstitials and local re-arrangements of atoms (which they refer to as bond
defects). The length of the defect was chosen to match experiment, and the
system was simulated using the Tersoff potential, annealed at 1400K. The excess
heat generated by relaxations of the high energy starting structure was removed
by velocity rescaling (a more sophisticated thermostat could have been used, but
may not have been needed). The orientation of the defect, along {311}, is set by
the initial structure, and after 2ns of annealing the defect had transformed
into a series of five-, seven- and eight-membered rings along with chains of
interstitials.

In the paper, this structure is compared to an experimental image, and the
agreement is excellent: the two structures are the same, even down to slight
differences in bond lengths and angles in the rings of the defects (lengths
agree to within 0.5 Angstroms, angles to within a few degrees). These
comparisons required some image processing, but overall the two approaches agree
to a remarkable degree, and validate each other. However, it’s important to note
that analysis of only one defect is presented, and there are few details given
of how changes in the initial conditions affected the final structure found by
MD. We don’t know how agreement would change with defect length, for instance.

What are the lessons to be learnt ? Certainly that molecular dynamics with
relatively simple forcefields is capable of quantitative, predictive accuracy
when the problem is chosen carefully. The bonding and angles in this problem are
sufficiently close to bulk-like that Tersoff works well: the problem lies within
the domain where the potential was fitted. A relatively modest simulation, using
4,800 atoms, and performing simple MD was effective. Notice what was compared:
not total energies (which many DFT practitioners rely on) but structural data.
This is appropriate here, particularly as the system generated was not
necessarily the thermodynamic minimum. It’s vital that we move away from the
knee-jerk assumption that lowest energy in simulation is what should be seen in
experiment (see Section 18.2.1 for vivid illustration of this).

In the slightly longer term, it will be interesting to see if large-scale DFT
techniques such as linear scaling DFT (see
[http://www.order-n.org/](http://www.order-n.org/) and a recent review[[2]](#R2)
for more details) will be able to contribute to this area, and generate more
quantitative information.

[<a name="R1">1]</a> Phys. Rev. Lett. **110**, 166102 (2013) [DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.166102](http://doi.dx.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.166102)

<a name="R2">[2]</a> Rep. Prog. Phys. **75**, 036503 (2012) [DOI:](http://doi.dx.org/)
